[enterprise-4.12] OSDOCS-14862 NETOBSERV 1.9 Features, Bugs, Known Issues (#95608)
openshift/openshift-docs: observability/network_observability/network-observability-operator-release-notes.adoc

For an overview of the Network Observability Operator, see xref:../../observability/network_observability/network-observability-overview.adoc#dependency-network-observability[About Network Observability Operator].

[id="network-observability-operator-release-notes-1-9_{context}"]
== Network Observability Operator 1.9
The following advisory is available for the Network Observability Operator 1.9:

> * link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHSA-2025:10020 [Network Observability Operator 1.9]

Reviewer: Link not working in preview. I think:

```suggestion
* link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHSA-2025:10020[Network Observability Operator 1.9]
```

Author: Good catch. Fixed. Thanks!

With this release, you can create filters to reduce the number of generated network flows and the resource usage of Network Observability components.

You can configure the following filters:

* eBPF Agent filters
* Flowlogs-pipeline filters

[id="ipsec-support_{context}"]
==== IPsec support
This update brings the following enhancements to Network Observability when IPsec is enabled on {product-title}:

* A new column named *IPsec Status* is displayed in the Network Observability *Traffic* flows view to show whether a flow was successfully IPsec-encrypted or if there was an error during encryption/decryption.

* A new dashboard showing the percentage of encrypted traffic is generated.

[id="network-observability-cli-1-9_{context}"]
==== Network Observability CLI
The following filtering options are now available for packets, flows, and metrics capture:

* Track IPsec using `--enable_ipsec`
* Value that determines the ratio of packets being sampled using `--sampling`
* Filter flows using a custom query using `--query`
* A comma separated list of interfaces to monitor using `--interfaces`
* A comma separated list of interfaces to exclude using `--exclude_interfaces`

> * A comma separated list of metric names to generate using `--include_list`

Author: Since this is a cherry-pick from a release from last week, this is being addressed with https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSDOCS-15160

For more information, see xref:../../observability/network_observability/netobserv_cli/netobserv-cli-reference.adoc#network-observability-netobserv-cli-reference_netobserv-cli-reference[Network Observability CLI reference].

[id="notable-technical-changes-1-9_{context}"]
=== Notable technical changes
* The `NetworkEvents` feature in Network Observability 1.9 has been updated to work with the newer Linux kernel of {product-title} 4.19. This update breaks compatibility with older kernels. As a result, the `NetworkEvents` feature can only be used with {product-title} 4.19. If you are using this feature with Network Observability 1.8 and {product-title} 4.18, consider avoiding a Network Observability upgrade or upgrading Network Observability to 1.9 and {product-title} to 4.19.

> * The `netobserv-reader` `clusterrole` has been renamed to `netobserv-loki-reader`.

Reviewer: This seems confusing to me. What about:

```suggestion
* The `netobserv-reader` cluster role has been renamed to `netobserv-loki-reader`.
```
